# Recommendation-Engine-using-Spark-MLlib
Movie Recommendation Engine using Spark MLlib
In this notebook we explore creating a movie recommendation system using Spark ML. We will work with the MovieLens 20M dataset (http://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens). This dataset consists of more than 20 million ratings of approximately 27,000 movies made by 138,000 MovieLens users who joined MovieLens in 2015. Includes tag genome data with 12 million relevance scores across 1,100 tags.MovieLens is a recommender system and virtual community website that recommends movies for its users to watch, based on their film preferences using collaborative filtering. This benchmark dataset was released April 2015.

Spark ML supports an implementation of matrix factorization for collaborative filtering. Matrix factorization models have consistently shown to perform extremely well for collaborative filtering. The type of matrix factorization we will explore in this notebook is called explicit matrix factorization. In explicit matrix factorization, preferences provided by users themselves are utilized - as contrasted with implicit matrix factorization, where only implicit feedback (e.g. views, clicks, purchases, likes, shares etc.) is utilized. Collaborative filtering aims to fill in the missing entries of a user-item (in the case of movie recommendations, this consists of user and movie IDs) association matrix in which users (userID) and items (movieID) are described by a small set of latent factors that can be used to predict missing entries. Spark ML uses the Alternating Least Squares (ALS) algorithm to learn these latent factors for this matix factorization problem. ALS works by iteratively solving a series of least square regression problems to derive a model.
